\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id@w{$}
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename fog.info
@settitle Fog version 1.1
@syncodeindex pg cp
@comment %**end of header
@copying
This manual is for the Console Form Designer - Fog (version 1.1).

Copyright @copyright{} 2014 Mohammed Isam.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.4 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.

@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory GNU Utilities
@direntry
* Fog: (fog).                   The console Form Designer
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Fog
@subtitle for version 1.1
@author Mohammed Isam (@email{mohammed_isam1984@@yahoo.com})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Fog

This manual is for the Console Form Designer - Fog (version 1.1).

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview:: Overview of the GnuDOS library
* Fog:: The console Form Designer
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Overview
@cindex Overview
@cindex GnuDOS library overview
@chapter Overview of the GnuDOS library

@heading About the GnuDOS library
GnuDOS package is a GNU software. It is a library designed to help new users
of the GNU system, who are coming from a DOS background, fit into the picture
and start using the GNU system with ease. It also addresses the console
programmers of such programs that have the look and feel of old DOS system.
The library is composed of core utilities and software applications:

@itemize @bullet
@item The core library (corelib) contains five utilities: Kbd (for keyboard 
handling), UKbd (includes unicode support), Screen (for screen drawing), 
Dialogs (for dialog boxes/window drawing), and Strings (for strings functions).
@item The software applications are three: Prime (console file manager), Mino
(console text editor), and Fog (console form designer).
@end itemize



@node Fog
@cindex Fog
@cindex The console Form Designer
@cindex Using the console Form Designer
@chapter Fog: The console Form Designer

Using the utilities of the GnuDOS library will ease the life of console 
programmers very much, but still though, putting it all together to design 
a complete user interface (or a form) can be a tedious job. @*
The FOG (Form Designer) helps with this aspect of programming. It provides 
a development environment that will make it easy to design an application 
interface for a program using the GnuDOS library under the console.

Fog is installed as part of the GnuDOS library package. It can be invoked by
running:

@example
$ fog
@end example

from the command line. The user interface is very simple:
@itemize
@item
Toolbox: Contains the set of 'tools' that can be added to a form, such as 
option items and bulleted items
@item
Form design: Displays the form under design
@item
Menu bar: Contains the menus File, Edit, Options and Help
@end itemize

Fog saves the form design typically in the same working directory from which it 
was invoked. This can be changed by specifying another path and file name in the 
Save dialog box.@*
Fog design files have the extension '.fog', to be distinct from other programs' 
files. These files should not be edited by hand. Instead, open Fog and edit the 
form design and re-save the form.@*
After finishing the form design, Fog can create a skeleton project that has most 
components pre-written for the programmer, mainly the parts that deal with the 
user interface and getting input from the user.@*

Select 'Write Project' from the File menu, or just press CTRL+W. Fog will write 
three files in the same project directory:
@itemize @bullet
@item
main.c: Contains the main() program function. If the form contains any buttons, 
it will contain a function event handler which is called whenever a button is 
clicked (or the user presses ENTER or SPACE on it).
@item
fog_header.h: Contains global variable declarations and function prototypes.
@item
form_design.c: Contains the following function definitions:
@itemize @minus
@item
void init_form(): Initializes the form and fills global variables
@item
void refresh_form(): Redraws the form into the screen
@item
void input_loop(): Catches user input on the form
@item
void close_form(): Restores the terminal and clears the screen before exiting
@end itemize
@end itemize

A program designed with Fog can be compiled as following (if using gcc compiler):

@example
$ gcc -o myprog main.c form_design.c -lgnudos
@end example


@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
