\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id@w{$}
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename mino.info
@settitle Mino version 1.0
@syncodeindex pg cp
@comment %**end of header
@copying
This manual is for the GnuDOS Mino program (version 1.0).

Copyright @copyright{} 2014 Mohammed Isam.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.

@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Editors
@direntry
* mino: (mino).                 Using Mino text editor.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Mino text editor
@subtitle for version 1.0
@author Mohammed Isam (@email{mohammed_isam1984@@yahoo.com})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top mino

This manual is for the Mino text editor (version 1.0).

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview:: Overview of the mino text editor
* Main Window:: Mino main window
* Menus:: Working around with menus
* Shortcuts:: Using keyboard shortcuts
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview of the mino text editor
@cindex Overview
@cindex Mino Overview

What is mino?
Mino is a GNU software, part of the GnuDOS package.
Mino is a text file editor for use with the GNU/Linux console/xterm. The idea 
was to provide a text editor that is user friendly and easy to use for those 
who came from DOS land. Having accustomed to SHIFT selecting text, using 
CTRL-shortcut keys and so on makes it hard for a regular Joe to dive in head
first into GNU syntax. Mino provides multi-level experience, the level of
complexity can be adjusted by the user: you want to use DOS-keys with a few
basic GNU ones? you want to go with the full power of the GNU system? All are
options that are provided by the six levels of experience of Mino:

  1- Newbie: All DOS shortcut keys, no GNU keys yet@*
  2- Novice: DOS shortcut keys, some of which are replaced with GNU's@*
  3- Intermediate: DOS keys with a few more replaced with GNU keys@*
  4- ِAdvanced: ... And more GNU keys in@*
  5- ِExpert: Very few DOS keys, most are GNU keys@*
  6- ِVeteran: Only GNU keys, no DOS-like keys@*
  
You start with level 1 by default.
To set your level, call the mino with '--levelX' or '-lX' options,
Where X is the level desired, for example:
@example
$mino --level2
@end example

@cindex Key bindings
@heading Which keys are defined for which level?
Below is a table showing the DOS-like key combinations along with their 
respective GNU key bindings. To the right is the level at which a certain GNU
key is defined. Each key defined is recognized in higher levels (e.g. level 2
keys are recognized in levels 3-4-5-6). Note that in level 6 only GNU keys are
defined, no DOS keys will work at this level!.@*

Keybindings:@*
In the table below, C-something means pressing down CTRL and then pressing the
other key. Note that '^' is the same as 'C', meaning CTRL key, it is just
typed like this so DOS users can feel familiar with the text.
The same as M-something, which means META or ALT.@*

=====================================================================@*
Function        DOS-like key    GNU key                 GnuDOS Level @*
=====================================================================@*
All DOS bindings and no GNU bindings			Newbie@*
@*
Next Line       Down            C-n                     Novice@*
Prev. Line      Up              C-p                     Novice@*
Backward        Left            C-b                     Novice@*
Forward         Right           C-f                     Novice@*
Back One Word   ^Left           M-b                     Intermediate@*
Fwd One Word    ^Right          M-f                     Intermediate@*
@*
Cancel          ESC             C-g                     Intermediate@*
Next Screen     PgDn            C-v                     Intermediate@*
Prev. Screen    PgUp            M-v                     Intermediate@*
Start of Line   Home            C-a                     Intermediate@*
End of Line     End             C-e                     Intermediate@*
Start of text   ^Home           C-<                     Intermediate@*
End of text     ^End            C->                     Intermediate@*
@*
Del prev char   BkSpc           DEL (is BkSpc)          Advanced@*
Del next char   Delete          C-d                     Advanced@*
Del prev word   ^BkSpc          M-DEL (is M-BkSpc)      Advanced@*
Del next word   ^Delete         M-d                     Advanced@*
Select text     SHIFT+Arrow     C-Space                 Advanced@*
Del selection   BkSpc/Del       C-w                     Advanced@*
@*
Quit            ^Q              C-x C-c                 Expert@*
Paste (yanking) ^V              C-y                     Expert@*
Del Line        ^D              C-k                     Expert@*
Undo            ^Z              C-/, C-_, C-x u         Expert@*
Open File       ^O              C-x C-f                 Expert@*
Save File       ^S              C-x C-s                 Expert@*
Find (Search)   ^F              C-s (forward search)    Expert@*
                                C-r (reverse search)    Expert@*
Help            F1              C-h ?                   Expert@*
@*
All GNU bindings and no DOS bindings                    Veteran@*
=====================================================================@*

@heading Why should I use it?@*
@cindex Why to use it
@cindex Why to use mino
@cindex Reasons of using mino
If you are new to GNU system and find it hard to dive in head-first into the
GNU keys and shortcuts for GNU programs (like emacs), this is the place to
start. Use you well-known DOS-like shortcuts, in the same time learn how to
use the GNU shortcuts.

@heading How to run it?@*	
@cindex How to run mino
@cindex Running mino
@cindex Starting mino
@cindex Invoking mino

After installing the package, simply type:

@example
$ mino
@end example

on your console (or xterm) and it will run. If you want to load a file into mino:

@example
$ mino file-name
@end example

To reset the configuration file:

@example
$ mino --reset-config
@end example

@cindex Command line help
To show command line help:

@example
$ mino [--help|-h]
@end example

@heading How does mino remember my preferences?@*

Mino stores its configuration in a file called '.mino.conf' under your home
directory. You can edit it by hand (or using mino!), but this is not advisable.
Use the Options menu under mino to change your preferences and mino will save
them into the config file.

@cindex Sentence highlighting
@cindex Code highlighting
@cindex Highlighting mode
@heading What about sentence highlighting?@*

Currently mino recognizes the following file types:
@itemize
@item
C/C++ Source and header files
@item
Perl scripts
@item
Shell scripts
@end itemize

Whenever you open a file of these types, mino will automatically adjust the
colors of the view so that the language keywords, library functions, and
operators (like +-*/ and so on) are highlighted each in a different
color, on a black background, to ease writing your programs.

@heading What else?@*

There is one catch: when running under the X system, the program will not be
able to capture all input from the keyboard, as X interferes with the keyboard
input. Don't panic, this is not much of a deal. Plus, there is a workaround. 
The only thing you will be missing is the SHIFT-select. That means you will not
be able to hold down shift and use arrow keys to select text. The solution is
using CTRL+E under X, which activates the select mode. Enter select mode, use
arrow keys to size your selection, do whatever you want with it, and exit the
select mode. You want a permanent solution? Run mino under the Linux console!.@*

And that's it for intro!

@node Main Window
@chapter Mino main window
@cindex Main window

After running mino, you are faced with a window that has the following components:

@cindex Menu bar
@heading Menu bar@*

At the top of the window. Contains menus: File, Edit, Options, and Help. The details of these menus can be found under @xref{Menus}.

@cindex Status bar
@heading Status bar@*

At the bottom is the status bar. It shows the current state of the file, which can be:

@cindex File state
@itemize @bullet
@item New: After opening a fresh mino window or selecting New from the File Menu
@item Opened: When a fresh file is opened
@item Saved: After saving the edited file
@item Modified: When any editing has not yet been saved
@item Idle: Nothing has happened yet!
@end itemize

The right side of the status bar shows the current position in file in terms of line and column.@*
 There are indicators which can appear in the status bar:

@cindex Status indicators
@itemize @bullet
@item CAPS: When Capslock is On
@item INS: When inserting mode is on (pressing Insert)
@item SEL: When selecting mode is on (pressing SHIFT under console or CTRL+E under X)
@end itemize

@cindex Editing area
@cindex Work area
@heading Editing area@*

Most of the main window will be occupied by the editing field containing the lines of the file selected. Most of your editing work will be done in this area.

@cindex Menus
@cindex Edit menus
@node Menus
@chapter Working around with menus

Menus are on the menu bar on the top of the @xref{Main Window}. They are:

@cindex File menu
@heading(1) File Menu (opened by pressing ALT+F):@*

@	New: Clears editing area and opens a new file@*
@	Open File: Opens another file for editing@*
@	Save File: Saves the current file to disk@*
@	Save As: Save the current file under another name@*
@	Print: Prints the current file to printer@*
@	Exit: Exits mino@*

@cindex Edit menu
@heading(2) Edit Menu (opened by pressing ALT+E):@*

@	Cut: Cuts current selection and places text into mino clipboard@*
@	Copy: Copies current selection to mino clipboard@*
@	Paste: Pastes whatever in the mino clipboard into the current position in file@*
@	Select All: Selects the whole document@*
@	Undo: Undoes the last action@*
@	Redo: Redoes the last action undone@*
@	Find: Finds text in the file@*
@	Replace: Finds and replaces specific text in the file@*
@	Delete Line: Deletes the line under the cursor@*
@	Toggle Select Mode (Only under X):@*
@	@	Toggles the select mode On (like pressing SHIFT)@*
@	@	or Off (Like releasing SHIFT)@*

@cindex Options menu
@heading(3) Options Menu (opened by pressing ALT+O):@*

@	Change colors: Opens a dialog box to select different colors for window, menu bar, ...@*
@	Tab spaces: Define the number of spaces to be inserted when you press TAB@*
@	Reset config: Resets the configuration (colors and tab spaces)@*
@*
All the Options menu items write the new values into the config file (~/.mino.conf).@*

@cindex Help menu
@heading(4) Help Menu (opened by pressing ALT+H):@*

@	View README: Displays the README file installed with the package@*
@	Quick Referece: Shows a quick reference for mino functions@*
@	About Mino: Shows About dialog box@*

@cindex Shortcuts
@cindex Keyboard shortcuts
@cindex Shortcuts keys
@node Shortcuts
@chapter Using keyboard shortcuts

Moving around with Shortcut Keys:@*
@	ALT+F: Open File menu@*
@	ALT+E: Open Edit menu@*
@	ALT+H: Open Help menu@*
@	ALT+O: Open Options menu@*
@*
(1) File menu shortcuts:@*
@	CTRL+O: Open file@*
@	CTRL+S: Save file@*
@	CTRL+P: Print file (currently under development)@*
@	CTRL+Q:Exit program@*
@*
(2) Edit menu shortcuts:@*
@	CTRL+X: Cut selection@*
@	CTRL+C: Copy selection@*
@	CTRL+V: Paste selection@*
@	CTRL+F: Find@*
@	CTRL+R: Find & Replace@*
@	CTRL+A: Select All@*
@	CTRL+D: Delete Line@*
@	CTRL+Z: Undo@*
@	CTRL+Y: Redo@*
@	CTRL+E: Toggle select mode (under X)@*


@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
